docs/source/index.rst, before:

==============
MPI for Python
==============

:Author:       Lisandro Dalcin
:Contact:      dalcinl@gmail.com
:Organization: `CIMEC <http://www.cimec.org.ar/>`_
:Address:      CCT CONICET, 3000 Santa Fe, Argentina


Online Documentation
--------------------

Hosted at SciPy servers [http://mpi4py.scipy.org/]:

Hosted at PyPI  servers [http://packages.python.org/mpi4py]:

+ `User Manual (HTML)`_ (generated with Sphinx_).
+ `User Manual (PDF)`_  (generated with Sphinx_).
+ `API Reference`_ (generated with Epydoc_).

.. _User Manual (HTML): usrman/index.html
.. _User Manual (PDF):  mpi4py.pdf
.. _API Reference: apiref/index.html

.. _Sphinx:    http://sphinx.pocoo.org/
.. _Epydoc:    http://epydoc.sourceforge.net/


Discussion and Support
----------------------

Hosted at Google Groups:

+ Group Page: http://groups.google.com/group/mpi4py
+ Mailing List: mpi4py@googlegroups.com


Downloads and Development
-------------------------

Hosted at Google Code:

+ Project Site: http://mpi4py.googlecode.com/
+ Source Releases: http://code.google.com/p/mpi4py/downloads/
+ Issue Tracker: http://code.google.com/p/mpi4py/issues/
+ Mercurial Repository: http://code.google.com/p/mpi4py

Commit message:

Update URLs after migration to Bitbucket

docs/source/index.rst, after:

==============
MPI for Python
==============

:Author:       Lisandro Dalcin
:Contact:      dalcinl@gmail.com
:Organization: `CIMEC <http://www.cimec.org.ar/>`_
:Address:      CCT CONICET, 3000 Santa Fe, Argentina


Online Documentation
--------------------

Hosted at SciPy servers [http://mpi4py.scipy.org/]:

Hosted at PyPI  servers [http://pythonhosted.org/mpi4py/]:

+ `User Manual (HTML)`_ (generated with Sphinx_).
+ `User Manual (PDF)`_  (generated with Sphinx_).
+ `API Reference`_      (generated with Epydoc_).

.. _User Manual (HTML): usrman/index.html
.. _User Manual (PDF):  mpi4py.pdf
.. _API Reference:      apiref/index.html

.. _Sphinx: http://sphinx-doc.org/
.. _Epydoc: http://epydoc.sourceforge.net/


Discussion and Support
----------------------

Hosted at Google Groups:

+ Group Page:   http://groups.google.com/group/mpi4py
+ Mailing List: mpi4py@googlegroups.com


Downloads and Development
-------------------------

Hosted at Bitbucket:

+ Project Site:    https://bitbucket.org/mpi4py/mpi4py
+ Source Releases: https://bitbucket.org/mpi4py/mpi4py/downloads
+ Issue Tracker:   https://bitbucket.org/mpi4py/mpi4py/issues
+ Git Repository:  https://bitbucket.org/mpi4py/mpi4py.git


Acknowledgments
---------------

This project was partially supported by the Center for Numerical
Porous Media, Division of Computer, Electrical, and Mathematical
Sciences & Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology (KAUST).
